---
title: "(ISMB 2018) Bridging Linear to Graph-based Alignment with Whole Genome Population Reference Graphs"
collection: talks
type: "Conference abstract talk"
permalink: /talks/2014-02-01-talk-2
venue: "Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology (ISMB) 2018"
date: 2018-07-06
location: "Chicago, IL"
---

[Long Abstract](https://mgunady.github.io/files/ISMB_HLA_long_abstract.pdf) | 
[Poster](https://mgunady.github.io/ISMB_HLA_poster.pdf) | 
[Presentation](https://mgunady.github.io/Yanagi_ISMB.pdf)

Recently, several attempts are devoted into building comprehensive catalogues of known genomic variants. However, read
alignment approaches that efficiently utilize them are scarce. Since the catalogues contain hundreds of alleles which in general
share most of their sequences except where the instant variations appear, that makes a graph of these alleles a reasonable and
efficient representation of the data. Unfortunately, the lack of efficient implementations and algorithms for graph-based
alignment makes graph-based approaches computationally expensive for practical application.
Our approach takes advantage of graph representation in obtaining prominent levels of data compressions, and efficiently
linearizes the variants graph by sacrificing a portion of the compression ratio. Our model for linearizing the variants graph depends
on our previous work in transcriptome segmentation for RNAseq. For each gene of interest, we start from the multiple sequence
alignment (MSA) of the individual alleles (which can be already provided in the catalogue or derived from VCF files). Then we use
Yanagi to generate a set of maximal L-disjoint segments representing the linearized MSA graph. The segments library
is then used by any alt-aware linear alignment tool.
